She said, what do you mean?
I said, well, there aren't any letters in pizza anymore, especially like the one that you just mentioned.
That letter is worth $50,000.
She said, ooh, no Charlie.
She calls me Charlie.
She's the only living person who calls me Charlie.
She said, do you think it's worth more?
So finally,
She sold it to him for $15,000.
And I didn't know that he got it.
When she said she'd sold it for $15,000, I said, Mary, who was the recipient?
And she said, Bradley Martin.
She said, do you think it's really worth more than that?
Because she loves money.
And you will find out.
That can't be construed as a criticism because that's the first thing you're going to find out, that everything she equates with money.
She doesn't equate John Keats with all the great poems that he wrote, which I love, and I'm sure she never read.
The best poet I've ever lived, I think, in the English language.
Yeah, fabulous.
I loved it.
There's a wonderful book that just came in from Harvard, by the way.
It's The Facsimiles of the Manuscripts.
I just got it, as I mentioned, I'm the book review editor, and it's the Houghton Collection of all the stuff at Harvard.
But surely more than that, Amy Lowell had a big collection.
Yeah.
And Carl Forsheimer had a big collection.
This is Keith's.
There must be more than the Houghton collection.
Well, I mean, at the Houghton Library.
Yeah, okay.
But the Houghton Library collection.
Go ahead.
I was going to say.
Gary Benjamin.
Yeah.
And I think she was just sick about that.
So anyway.
keeps for $15,000.
But I told her, I told her it was a terribly valuable letter.
And Martin bragged about that market until the day of his death.
It's probably the last words you ever spoke.
Well, I saw that thing sold at the auction.
I saw it.
Tell me a little bit about Wise before.
Thomas J. Wise and Carter and Pauline.
John Carter was a very remarkable man.
in many ways.
His favorite poet, he did not have much of a sense of humor when he met me, but he was obliged to develop it.
His favorite poet was A. E. Hausman, and the fact that I could quote from Hausman when we first met, I know a number of poets, impressed him greatly.
And so we got along terrifically, and
One time he said to me, you know, Haussmann is undoubtedly the greatest British poet of this century, and yet he has not truly appreciated the way he should be.
And I said, don't underestimate the length and breadth of his fame, John.
I got in an elevator the other day, and there engraved in bronze, I saw two words.
from a two-word quote from when I was young and 20.
And John said, really?
In bronze?
I said, yes.
He said, oh, what were they?
I said, otis.
And otis, true, it is true.
You know, otis in the elevator.
That's funny.
That's cute.
That's a good story.
He got a little upset, but he recovered quickly.
And another time, John was a connoisseur of wines, and the temperature had to be exactly precise.
I mean, if the temperature weren't 71.3, when it should be that, he would complain and send the wine back.
And I always drank beer.
And one day he said to me, why, why, why, God's name, were you drinking that awful swill when you could share this bottle of wine with me?
And so I said, well, I said, since Hagee Hausman is your gospel, you surely should remember that milk does more than milk can to justify God's ways to man.
And he said, oh, okay.
Well, I won't make any more remarks about it.
But he was a wonderful man, a great scholar, a great scholar.
He was a first-class guy.
And since he died, by the way, all of his files have gone down to Philadelphia to Rosenbach.
And when Ed Wolff was doing his biography, he didn't have access to all that stuff.
And so I might just go out and look at some of that stuff, and that'll be brand-new, fresh material, you know, on Rosenbach.
And so they've told me I can have access to that, which is terrific.
And even Ed Wolf has told me that that'll be stuff he didn't have a chance to look at, because it was all up in New York.
I offered Ed Wolf some stories about Rosenbaum, but he didn't want them.
Why is that?
He said, I've already got more than I can use.
Ed Wolf does not like me, as you will speedily discover.
But I don't know why.
He has.
He's said in his ways in some opinions, I think.
But John Fleming liked me very much.
What kind of Rosenbach stories did you have that you didn't want?
Well, I'll tell you the story.
I will clue you in, if I ever meet you, onto the purchase of Franklin's day book, which
uh is described in considerable detail in books and bidders which was written by the way by emory strokash did you know that no so so the doctor didn't write that himself no he did not it was allegedly dictated but actually it was written by this uh secretary he had to whom he acknowledges his his debt of gratitude and she came in to see me one day a very old lady
And most people never got in to see me because I don't see many people.
But she got in to see me and I asked her to come in after I found out her name.
And I said to her, you wrote books and bidders.
And she said yes.
And I jumped out of my chair and I went over and I threw my arms around her and kissed her.
And I said, you know, that book was my Bible when I was a boy.
Really?
I have a signed copy of that, by the way.
So what did she say to that?
She said, oh, thank you so much.
And I said, I'll prove it to you.
I said, you start any sentence you want to and I'll finish it.
Come on.
And so she did.
She started a sentence and I finished it.
And
She was absolutely floored.
I'd be floored.
How could you... Well, what?
Talking to me?
You think I'm feeble-minded, perhaps?
No, but I read hundreds of books, but I don't think I could... I could recite them for a minute.
Well, I was just lucky.
I told her I was just lucky.
I said I took a desperate gamble, and it worked.
And, uh...
Anyhow, I had a wonderful talk with him.
That's great.
Now, how about those, he did a little book of fiction of mystery stories.
Do you think somebody ghosted them for him as well?
I don't know about that.
I have a copy of that.
I just recently acquired it.
Yeah, he brags about a copy bringing $40 when it was still available from the publisher at the publisher's price.
I'm sure you know that.
It's right in Books of Bitter.
That's correct, yeah.
That's right.
It's a very interesting story.
Okay.
He told a lot of interesting stories, but a lot of them were poppycock.
Well, he used to like to sit around.
If you remind me about, I'll try to find the true story of how Rosenbach got Franklin's daybook.
I mean, his expenses, telling what he printed and how much it cost and how many copies were printed.
Really?
And...
I think he sold that for $17,500.
And I've got in another book, a little pamphlet-like book that nobody knows about, the true story of how he bought it for $500.
By ruining, screwing, and tattooing some poor soul.
That goes back to what you were saying earlier, huh?
Yep.
Well, you know, Rosenbach himself said there never was a great book that wasn't stolen at least once.
He said that?
Yep.
You're going to have to find that quote.
Is that in Books and Bitters?
I don't know.
I have some other books by Rosenbaum.
Yeah, Bookman's Holiday.
That was John Fleming's favorite statement.
That's a good story.
And I said, John, you're only saying that because you've got a big collection of heisted books that the owners would be glad to reclaim if they knew you had them.
That's a great story.
I know a woman who used to work with him, Priscilla Juvelas.
Did you know Priscilla?
I don't know whether I did or not.
Yeah, well, she's up here in Boston now.
She's a book dealer.
Very good.
Very bright woman.
She speaks very highly of Fleming.
I was very, very fond of him.
And I know that he liked me a lot.
Do you know this fellow Dave Kirchenbaum in New York at all?
The Carnegie books?
Yeah, I know him.
What do you know about him?
except that he's 95 years old, and he wrote the introduction to the Bradley Martin catalog there.
You know, I like Dave.
A lot of people run him down.
He came to see me about five years ago.
I'd ordered something from him, or I'd ordered something from somebody else, and he happened to be in this guy's shop, and the guy said, would you take this over to Hamilton since you're going over his way?
So he brought it in to me.
And I took it, and I thanked him, and I said, just a minute, Dave, I'll give you a dollar.
I said, look, I didn't realize, you know, that you were doing this kind of thing, but I occasionally have use for a messenger, and I'd be very happy to.
He said, oh, no.
He said, I'm not a messenger.
Of course I knew that.
I'm just kidding.
Nice guy.
I had lunch with him one day.
You know, a real interesting guy that you should talk to is, uh, uh, give me a second, uh, Argosy, uh, Lou, uh, Lou Cohen.
Okay, the Argosy bookstore guy, right?
Yeah, and he has a daughter named, uh, uh,
It's okay.
The Agassi bookstore, that's all I need tonight.
Yeah, go and see Lou Cohen.
Okay.
Without fail, he is a gold mine of anecdotes.
That's what I need.
And those gals, Westenburg and Stern, some people say, are pretty interesting, too.
Ralph?
I don't know him.
I haven't talked to him yet, but a few people have said I might talk to them, too.
You know, I'm interested in people that go back a little way and...
Yeah, that's what I figured.
That's the reason you got in touch with me.
Well, yeah, but what I like is you're not a bullshitter either.
I mean, you come straight at you.
I love that.
I mean, you say what's on your mind.
But Lou Feldman, I mean, Lou Cohen will give you a lot of really good stories.
Do you think he knew Lou Feldman?
Oh, sure.
Yeah.
I'm really trying to get a profile of this guy together.
Feldman?
Yeah.
Not a profile, but I really want to know how he could have become the exclusive agent for Texas.
That's really a story that hasn't been answered yet.
I've heard about dealers who went to Texas and offered stuff, and they couldn't sell it.
They sell it to Lou Feldman, and then they'd buy it for, you know, this is what people say.
Oh, boy, I can tell you a lot of stories about that.
I can tell you a lot of gruesome stories about jail.
Yale is the same thing.
They say Yale almost went there, you know, but that's the Beinecke, and that's good stature.
That's Ivy League, right?
You can get away with it over there.
Well, I'll tell you.
If I'm in the mood, I might tell you a few stories.
I have a feeling we have to get together in New York sometime.
Are you agreeable to that?
I don't know.
It depends on how much work I have.
It just happens that I am so exhausted now that I didn't want to work.
And so I told my assistant that I didn't want to talk to you.
I said, change and put him off.
I don't want to see him at all.
And she said, well, you know, I put him off already and you made this appointment.
So I said, all right, I'll talk to him for a minute.
Okay.
Then I realized that if I quit talking to you, I have other hideous jobs.
So I'm the lucky guy then.
I'm the lucky recipient of all this.
Okay.
Well, sometimes, you know, you can win bigger by default than if you really knock your opponent out.
And he fails to show up for the fight.
Well, about the T.J.
Weiss situation, though.
Did you say you knew much about that?
Yes.
I know a few things about that.
And...
I guess there had been suspicions that he had done some forgeries before.
As far back as 1902 and 1903, the writing edition of the sonnets of Elizabeth Barrow Browning, that had been condemned.
And what Wise did, of course, was since he was a member of the Browning Society,
He had the unbelievable chutzpah to take the forgery of that damn book to Robert Browning.
And Browning looked at it, and he wrote on it, this must be a pirated edition, as I never heard of it before.
Or words to that effect.
Now, in essence, that...
established this book which bought high prices at one time.
Do you think there's a crow on our line?
No, I don't.
I hear you flying.
Uh, instead of a forgery, you understand there's a great difference between a pirated book and a forged book.
A pirated book can be a very valuable book published prior to the, uh,
the authorized first edition.
Whereas a forgery is nothing but a damn forgery, no matter how you look at it.
That's right.
Well, I mean, D. H. Lawrence, Lady Chatterley's Lover, had some very interesting forgery, piracies.
Yes.
Those are not much collected.
Well, because I guess there were so many of them.
There were so many of them, yeah.
Yeah.
I mean, Kipling had some forgeries.
In those days, all you had to do was use a four-letter word beginning with F and ending with K. And I don't mean fork, which is something I've used with a knife.
And your book would be pirated.
Can you imagine how many editions there have been of things like The Story of a Flea or Fanny Hill or that kind of thing?
Innumerable.
But you think that they stayed away from Wise because of his stature.
He was a major, major guy in England, and he was a heavyweight.
They had given the Ashley Library to the British Museum.
Not only that, as a reward for his forgeries, Oxford made him an honorary Master of Arts.
And there is a picture of him.
Oh, it's wonderful.
Yeah, it's the farthest piece, the Paddington's biography, which is just wonderful, with his cap and gown on.
Which bio are you alluding to?
Of Forging Ahead.
Oh, that's Partington's book.
That's what I just said, Partington's book.
Yeah.
The letter book is Ratchford's Letters of T.J.
Wise and John H. Wren.
Yeah, I've got that.
That's excellent.
But that's really kind of a little one-sided, though.
You really don't get the other side.
I don't know.
You get the other side if you know what this bastard was up to.
Then you get it, and you get it, and you see the subtleties of the whole thing.
The manipulations that are going on, I think, too.
Yeah, because otherwise you just hear the naked facts of what he did without understanding how he was able to do it.
It was brilliant, because he also had access to the British Library, and so he managed to get copies in the library collections, which gave them provenance.
Yes, he stole title pages.
Isn't that unbelievable?
You talk about brazen.
I mean, they proved that he tore out pages so he could make complete copies.
Unbelievable.
I'm going to let you go now, sir.
Okay.
What's your name?
My name is Nick.
Is it Nicholas?
Just a minute, I'll write it down.
Okay.
Yeah.
Nick.
As in Nicholas.
Okay.
It's B-A-S-B-A-N-E-S.
Baz Baines.
B-A-S-A-N-E-S.
B-A-S-B-A-N-E-S.
Greek name.
Baz Baines.
I'm going to just send you a letter.
Thank you for this conversation.
And say no way in.
A little better.
Okay.
Okay?
And you certainly can quote anything I've said, except please don't quote anything.
If I happen to say anything against a living person, I don't want to do that.
No, you were very circumspect about that.
And it's not because I fear it, because I don't fear anybody or anything.
It's just that I don't want to hurt anybody or, you know.
Yep, no need for it.
There are enough dead people.
Okay.
Thank you, sir.
Thank you very much.
Lots of luck on your other interviews.
Thank you, sir.
Bye-bye.